Seeing Deeper

> We have to learn that these are the kinds of disciplines in the field of science that you have to learn – to know when you know and when you don't know, and what it is you know and what it is you don't know.  You've go to be very careful not to confuse yourself.
>- Richard Feynman ({https://calteches.library.caltech.edu/35/2/PointofView.htm})

What makes a good researcher? I've noticed that many researchers I admire have a common level of 
meticulousness. These researchers are smart, but what makes them great is this care, a care that 
does away with comforting illusions. In a sense, they are on a diametrically opposite pole of the 
distribution from conspiracy theorists. For consipracy theorists, the part of the brain which 
generates comforting illusions acts in overdrive. When I envision a great scientist, I envision 
someone who is on guard against these illusions, someone who overcomes themselves to better
perceive the world.

In a sense, babies have one ingredient of this, in that they question the foundations of any given 
statement. Feynman again: you can be satisfied that "ice is slippery", or go one level deeper and 
try to understand the question of why ice is slippery. To be maximally scientific, we should understand 
the phenomenon down to fundamental laws we accept to be true or fundamental measurements of experiment.
The temptation here is to offer a colloquial explanation which maintains the semblance of truth which 
falls apart with rigorous experimentation.

A good example of this in robotics, my field of study, are questions related to behavior cloning.
Recently, Seohong wrote a good summary of some of these questions in the following blog post: 
{https://seohong.me/blog/behavioral-cloning-mystery/}. Every problem mentioned here is well-known,
but often colloquial explanations have been offered which require further scrutiny. For example,
history-conditioned policies are suggested to be hard because of causal confusion, a phenomenon 
where a model overfits to spurious correlations. However, this is not the case in diffusion 
policies, which exhibit a separate problem which I resolve in a previous paper (Torne et al. 2025).
Even after doing such research, I am still astonished at how many of these paradoxes that 
Seohong mentions I simply took for granted.

I consider researchers as above more "principled" or theoretical researchers. While many researchers 
don't fit this mold, I think the meticulousness mentioned above is a fundamental component of good 
research of any style. Indeed, I propose that where we apply such meticulousness is the key distingushing 
factor of good research styles. For example, more "empirical" or practical/systems researchers often 
apply no less meticulousness in robotics understanding normalization, action spaces, and various 
foundational components of the robot policy while designing practical systems which accomplish state-of-the-art 
tasks in robotic manipulation. Here, we can't isolate one problem like the theoretical researchers, 
but meticulousness and taste helps us understand which components of the policy are truly crucial for 
improving performance and where potential bottlenecks lie in terms of real-world applicability.

What does this mean for us aspiring researchers? While genius is uncontrollable, cultivating this 
meticulousness of mind is something which can be improved through practice, much like the other 
practical aspects of excellence*. We should cultivate this virtue and work with others who value 
such insight, to see one level deeper than before.

*For an article aligned with my thoughts on excellence, see <The Mundanity of Excellence> {https://www.jstor.org/stable/202063}